[docs] [C++20] [Modules] Ideas for transitioning to modules (#80687)
llvm/llvm-project: clang/docs/StandardCPlusPlusModules.rst

The key part of the tip is to reduce the duplications from the text includes.

Ideas for converting to modules
-------------------------------

For new libraries, we encourage them to use modules completely from day one if possible.
This will be pretty helpful to make the whole ecosystems to get ready.

> For many existing libraries, it may be a breaking change to refactor themselves

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For many existing libraries, it may be a breaking change to refactor them
```

> into modules completely. So that many existing libraries need to provide headers and module

Reviewer: ```suggestion
into modules completely. So many existing libraries will need to provide headers and module
```

interfaces for a while to not break existing users.
Here we provide some ideas to ease the transition process for existing libraries.

> **Note that the this section is only about helping ideas instead of requirement from clang**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note that the this section is only about helpful ideas instead of requirement from clang**.
```

Let's start with the case that there is no dependency or no dependent libraries providing
modules for your library.

ABI non-breaking styles
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

export-using style
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: c++

  module;
  #include "header_1.h"
  #include "header_2.h"
  ...
  #include "header_n.h"
  export module your_library;
  export namespace your_namespace {
    using decl_1;
    using decl_2;
    ...
    using decl_n;
  }

> As the example shows, you need to include all the headers containing declarations needs
> to be exported and `using` such declarations in an `export` block. Then, basically,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the example shows, you need to include all the headers containing declarations that need
to be exported and `using` such declarations in an `export` block. Then, basically,
```

we're done.

export extern-C++ style
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: c++

  module;
  #include "third_party/A/headers.h"
  #include "third_party/B/headers.h"
  ...
  #include "third_party/Z/headers.h"
  export module your_library;
  #define IN_MODULE_INTERFACE
  extern "C++" {
    #include "header_1.h"
    #include "header_2.h"
    ...
    #include "header_n.h"
  }

Then in your headers (from ``header_1.h`` to ``header_n.h``), you need to define the macro:

.. code-block:: c++

  #ifdef IN_MODULE_INTERFACE
  #define EXPORT export
  #else
  #define EXPORT
  #endif

And you should put ``EXPORT`` to the beginning of the declarations you want to export.

Also it is suggested to refactor your headers to include thirdparty headers conditionally:

.. code-block:: c++

  + #ifndef IN_MODULE_INTERFACE
  #include "third_party/A/headers.h"
  + #endif

  #include "header_x.h"

  ...

This may be helpful to get better diagnostic messages if you forgot to update your module 

> interface unit file during maintaining.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interface unit file to match changes to the headers in the future.
```

The reasoning for the practice is that the declarations in the language linkage are considered
to be attached to the global module. So the ABI of your library in the modular version
wouldn't change.

While this style looks not as convenient as the export-using style, it is easier to convert 
to other styles.

ABI breaking style
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The term ``ABI breaking`` sounds terrifying generally. But you may want it here if you want
to force your users to introduce your library in a consistent way. E.g., they either include
your headers all the way or import your modules all the way.

> The style prevents the users to include your headers and import your modules at the same time
> in the same repo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The style prevents the users from including your headers and importing your modules at the same time
in the same repo.
```

> in the same repo.

Reviewer: I would imagine this is generally an anti-goal for most people, or would create maintenance challenges - because if your library is used by other libraries - some of those users might be using C++20 modules, and some might not be. And then if you want to depend on all those libraries together in some other library/program, it'd be unfortunate if you were stuck/not able to do that due to the very opinionated original library that said "only use headers or only use modules, don't mix and match".

Author: Personally I'd like to do this for my library. I feel the idea is somewhat like `private` or `final` in C++. They make the project to be clean by restricting the usages. I know this is not universally true. For example, fundamental libraries like boost or STL may not be in this. 

And I feel this may be fine since it is only an idea instead of requiring  people to follow. I just want to give a hint to people who want to do this but don't know how.

Reviewer: What's the motivation for doing this? Given the challenges it presents to downstream usage of the library?

The pattern for ABI breaking style is similar with export extern-C++ style.

.. code-block:: c++

  module;
  #include "third_party/A/headers.h"
  #include "third_party/B/headers.h"
  ...
  #include "third_party/Z/headers.h"
  export module your_library;
  #define IN_MODULE_INTERFACE
  #include "header_1.h"
  #include "header_2.h"
  ...
  #include "header_n.h"

  #if the number of .cpp files in your project are small
  module :private;
  #include "source_1.cpp"
  #include "source_2.cpp"
  ...
  #include "source_n.cpp"
  #else // the number of .cpp files in your project are a lot
  // Using all the declarations from thirdparty libraries which are
  // used in the .cpp files.
  namespace third_party_namespace {
    using third_party_decl_used_in_cpp_1;
    using third_party_decl_used_in_cpp_2;
    ...
    using third_party_decl_used_in_cpp_n;
  }
  #endif

(And add `EXPORT` and conditional include to the headers as suggested in the export
extern-C++ style section)

> Remember that the ABI get changed and we need to compile our source files into the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remember that the ABI is changed and we need to compile our source files into the
```

new ABI format. This is the job of the additional part of the interface unit:

.. code-block:: c++

  #if the number of .cpp files in your project are small
  module :private;
  #include "source_1.cpp"
  #include "source_2.cpp"
  ...
  #include "source_n.cpp"
  #else // the number of .cpp files in your project are a lot
  // Using all the declarations from thirdparty libraries which are
  // used in the .cpp files.
  namespace third_party_namespace {
    using third_party_decl_used_in_cpp_1;
    using third_party_decl_used_in_cpp_2;
    ...
    using third_party_decl_used_in_cpp_n;
  }
  #endif

> In case the number of your source files are small, we may put everything in the private

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have relatively few source files, you may put everything in the private
```

module fragment directly. (it is suggested to add conditional include to the source

> files too). But it will make the compilation of the module interface unit to be slow
> when the number of the source files are not small enough.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
files too). But it will make the compilation of the module interface unit slow
if there are many source files.
```

**Note that the private module fragment can only be in the primary module interface unit
and the primary module interface unit containing private module fragment should be the only
module unit of the corresponding module.**

In that case, you need to convert your source files (.cpp files) to module implementation units:

.. code-block:: c++

  + #ifndef IN_MODULE_INTERFACE
  // List all the includes here.
  #include "third_party/A/headers.h"
  ...
  #include "header.h"
  + #endif

  + module your_library;

  // Following off should be unchanged.
  ...

The module implementation unit will import the primary module implicitly.
We don't include any headers in the module implementation units
here since we want to avoid duplicated declarations between translation units.

> This is the reason why we add non-exported using declarations from the third

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the reason why we add non-exported using declarations from third
```

party libraries in the primary module interface unit.

And if you provide your library as ``libyour_library.so``, you probably need to
provide a modular one ``libyour_library_modules.so`` since you changed the ABI.

What if there are headers only inclued by the source files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The above practice may be problematic if there are headers only included by the source
files. If you're using private module fragment, you may solve the issue by including them
in the private module fragment. While it is OK to solve it by including the implementation
headers in the module purview if you're using implementation module units, it may be

> suboptimal since the primary module interface units now containing entities not belongs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
suboptimal since the primary module interface units now contains entities not belongs
```

to the interface.

If you're a perfectionist, maybe you can improve it by introducing internal module partition unit.

The internal module partition unit is an importable module unit which is internal
to the module itself. The concept just meets the headers only included by the source files.

We don't show code snippet since it may be too verbose or not good or not general.
But it may not be too hard if you can understand the points of the section.

Providing a header to skip parsing redundant headers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is a problem for clang to handle redeclarations between translation units.
Also there is a long standing issue in clang (`problematic include after import <https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/61465>`_).

> But even if the issue get fixed in clang someday, the users may still get slower compilation speed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But even if the issue gets fixed in clang someday, the users may still get slower compilation speed
```
